#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 2.16
\textclass revtex
\options aps,manuscript
\language default
\inputencoding latin1
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title


\series bold 
Linear 
\series default 
s
\series bold 
caling Gaussian orbital 
\series default 
m
\series bold 
ethods for the ab initio simulation of periodic systems
\layout Author

C.J.
 Tymczak and Matt Challacombe
\layout Address

Theoretical Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico
 87545
\layout Date


\latex latex 

\backslash 
today{}
\layout Abstract

Periodic boundary conditions have been implemented in the linear scaling
 Quantum Chemistry code MondoSCF.
 For the two-electron Coulomb matrix, this has been achieved with an exact
 multipole expansion of the long range Coulomb field.
 This yields a spherically summed boundary condition that is easily transformed
 to tinfoil boundary conditions.
 In order to achieve linear scaling of the short range Coulomb field, a
 Quantum Chemical Tree Code (QCTC) is used.
 Periodic boundary conditions have also been incorporated into calculations
 of the local exchange-correlation matrix.
 A Hierarchical Cubature (HiCu), pure Cartesian adaptive grid is used.
 This method achieves linear scaling through the use of advanced data structures
 (k-d trees) that maximally exploits locality of the density.
 Finally, the current capabilities of MondoSCF for condensed phases will
 be demonstrated.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vfill
\layout Description

LA-UR-0000
\the_end
